Harry Potter, a seemingly ordinary ten year old boy, begins to receive unusual letters from a place called Hogwarts. As his family (aunt, uncle, and cousin) take the letters away from him, more and more continue to come. Eventually the family is forced out of their house and escape to a remote island. On his eleventh birthday, a half giant named Hagrid visits the family and reveals to Harry that he is a wizard. The letter is at last opened by Harry and he discovers that he is invited to attend a prestigious Wizarding school called Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Hagrid later brings Harry to Diagon Alley, a magical shopping strip, for his school supplies. Eventually, Harry must begin his search for platform nine and three quarters (the train platform that hosts the Hogwarts Express). Lost in Kings Cross Station, he meets a Wizarding family called the Weasleys and their son Ron. With their help, he boards the train and begins his journey to Hogwarts.

Harry and Ron are sorted into Gryffindor, one of the four Hogwarts houses. In their first flying lesson, Harry learns that he is a natural flier and unwittingly makes the Quidditch team (a magical sport played on brooms). An arrogant Slytherin, Malfoy, challenges Harry and Ron to a duel one night in a fit of anger. Flaking out, Malfoy left the two boys to be caught by the school's scary caretaker Filch. In their attempt to flee the caretaker, they wind up in a forbidden room where they discover a three headed dog. Since that incident, everything was going well for the duo until Halloween. One of the professors, Quirrell, interupted dinner with news that there was a troll in the dungeon. All students were sent to their dormitories when Harry realized that a fellow Gryffindor upset and alone in a bathroom. Intent on bringing her back to the safety of the tower, Harry and Ron find the fellow Gryffindor, Hermione being terrorized by the troll. Defeating it, the three became inseperable.

After the troll incident, weird things continue to occur around Hogwarts. During the first quidditch match of the season, Harry's broom was cursed to throw him off. Luck was on his side, though, and Harry fell safely to the ground and caught the golden snitch winning the game. The trio continue school and work to solve the mystery about what the three headed dog (come to be known as 'Fluffy') is protecting. Hagrid lets it slip to them that it has something to do with a man named Nicholas Flamel. During a detention, earned for trying to smuggle a dragon out of the school, Harry and Ron are sent into the Forbidden Forest with Malfoy and Hagrid. Here they discover that Voldemort (the man who killed Harry's family) is behind the deaths of the unicorns in the forest. Knowing that Voldemort is around the school, and thinking that a professor named Snape is trying to steal the Sorcerer's Stone for him, the trio braves the room with the three headed dog. They face several tasks until Harry enters the final room. Here he encounters not Snape, but Professor Quirrel who is sharing a body with Voldemort. Harry defeats him and wakes in the Hospital Wing. The headmaster, Dumbledore, explains what happened and awards Harry and his friends house points for sticking together, leading Gryffindor to win the House Cup.