The house of the cunning and ambitious, Slytherin is the house of the snakes (and home to Draco Malfoy, Albus Severus Potter, and Dolores Umbridge). The character traits of this house are: ambitious, shrewd, cunning, strong leaders, and achievement-oriented. Generally, Slytherins are regarded as Pure-Bloods and sneaky.

Decorated in green and silver, Slytherin Dungeon can only be entered by speaking the password aloud in front of a stretch of damp stone wall. Once spoken, a concealed stone door will slide aside leading to the common room. An interesting fact: the Slytherin dungeon is located beneath the Black Lake. Students can see into the lake from the windows in the common room. Additionally, Slytherins are supported by their house ghost: Bloody Baron. He gets his name from his death. He had fallen in love with Helena Ravenclaw (The Grey Lady), and when she refused to return to their home country with him he killed her rage. Out of despair for killing his love, he stabbed himself with the same knife.

During the time of Harry Potter's education, the head of Slytherin was taken mostly by Severus Snape. During Harry's sixth year, however, Severus Snape was appointed Headmaster and left Horace Slughorn as head of Slytherin. Additionally, Tom Riddle also known as Voldemort was a Slytherin. He went on to become one of the darkest lords that the magical world has ever seen.

The house of Slytherin was founded by Salazar Slytherin during medieval times. While alive, he selected his students based on resourcefulness, cleverness, determination, and a certain disregard for the rules. He also considered the ability to speak Parseltongue and blood purity. Slytherin was distrustful of muggle-born students and eventually left the other three founders as he believed muggle-borns should no be admitted into Hogwarts. Before his leaving, he created the Chamber of Secrets containing a basilisk to purge the school of muggle-borns. Like the other founders, Slytherin also possessed a magical artifact. His was a locket with the letter 'S' on the front. Tom Riddle (Voldemort) would later taint it as a horcrux to ensure his immortality.